KAREN TAYLOR: I believe we're recording. Welcome everyone to the VA Enterprise Event Bus state of the system talk. It's August 8, 2023.
I'm Karen Taylor. I'm the product manager for the Event Bus team, and I'm here with the team to present a talk about event-driven architecture and how
the Event Bus fits into that as well as do some summarizing of the work that we've done in our most recent phase of development.
So what we'll be talking about today.
We're gonna talk about what is event-driven architecture. We'll talk about the problems we can solve with event driven architecture.
We'll talk in a little bit more detail about how specifically the Event Bus is implementing event driven architecture.
We'll do a demo of our current Event Bus system capabilities.
We'll talk a little bit about what's next for the product. And then we'll finish with some links to some resources and documentation.
So we'll start today with what is event-driven architecture, and I'm gonna hand this off to Emily Wilson, who is the tech lead on the team.
EMILY WILSON: Hello, everyone! So when we talk about the Enterprise Event Bus, we describe it as an asynchronous event processing system.
Now, I want to dive into a little bit about what that means and what this architectural pattern looks like.
So what we have is we have a set of data systems. Now, this is in the upper right hand corner of this slide.
You see the data systems. These data systems generate events.
Now, event is a quite a generic term. This essentially means a specific instance of something that happened.
So this can be a single data system, such as a database having a change of state, or it can be a more complicated event, which
again, in this, this diagram, you see multiple data systems. Then you see the
set of things that changed
which describes the transitions from the different states.
So what the Enterprise Event Bus does is we form connections to these data systems, and we provide the infrastructure
to stream these sequences of events and allow consumers to consume from these streams of events.
So the Enterprise Event Bus acts as an opinionated conduit between these data systems and the clients that are consuming
from these events. One of the kind of important technical details here is that the events exist in a chronological order.
So you can kind of see how the state changes over time.
Another really kind of key feature here is that these event processing systems are asynchronous.
So what this means is that the systems that are consuming the events
don't need to do this at the same time they are produced. And this helps decouple the different systems.
Another kind of key feature here is that multiple clients can consume events from a single topic.
So to summarize what the Enterprise Event Bus is, it's a VA-wide system for streaming different events from assorted producers.
And that is the data systems that produce the events into consumers.
Those are the data systems that are consuming the events and doing something with them.
Go to the next slide, and we can kind of dive into what this means for VA systems specifically.
So this diagram illustrates what our goal for this system is. And it kind of illustrates specifically
what some of the systems that we envision could potentially become part of this Enterprise Event Bus.
Currently, in this phase of the project, we've connected ourselves to the Benefits Integration Platform. That's this red, little, six-sided shape,
I can't remember the name for a six-sided shape, up in this corner. And we've also connected to a VistA event, and that's this orange thing.
And, as you can see, we stream into our system.
And then over on the right hand side a variety of different systems can consume these events. We currently have little
demos that we'll be illustrating shortly.
But I think this diagram is a really great illustration of what the power of the Enterprise Event Bus could be.
I'm gonna transition over into
my segue to plug our developer portal. We have more in depth information about this on our developer portal. There'll be a link at the end.
It contains some great high, level information about the underlying architecture.
My colleague Andrea is gonna dive into some of the technical implementations and get into some of the nitty gritty of how this works.
KAREN TAYLOR: We're going to talk about how problems can be solved with event-driven architecture.
So, as you might imagine, there is more than one problem we can solve with event-driven architecture, but we're going to focus on 3 today.
The first is replacing heavy orchestration and high latency or infrequent processes.
Systems that make calls to multiple external systems, await statuses, and retry,
are prone to issues like partial failures and can shift to consuming those
events from just one single system in this event system architecture that we're talking about today.
In a similar vein, systems with low frequency, polling, batch
processing, or requiring Veterans or staff to manually check on status updates is often inefficient
and can be replaced by the near real time updates that are pushed to the consuming system through the architecture that Emily was just showing.
A second problem that this can solve is replacing tightly coupled components with event-driven architecture, producing systems and consuming systems
do not have a direct connection. The consuming systems can act upon events as they are streamed,
instead of needing to maintain one-to-one connections with their other systems,
and having to wait for the call and response cycle to complete with each of those other systems.
So that helps to add resiliency in general to the overall system interactions that are going on.
And the third problem we want to talk about today is how event driven architecture, and specifically the Event Bus, can expedite user notifications.
Although there are many systems that would benefit from events as we've been talking about in terms of the architecture
Emily just showed and some of the problems I just
discussed that we could solve, almost any scenario where a side effect or desired outcome of a business action is to notify
the Veteran is a candidate for an event stream because any system, anywhere, that wants to
make sure Veteran knows about something can drop an event on the Event Bus.
And any system that actually does the notification can then pick it up from the bus.
So that's all about problems. Now, we are going to move on to Andrea, another engineer on the team to talk a little about our specific implementation.
ANDREA SINGH: Yes. So in this last phase we migrated from a self-hosted Kafka version to MSK, or Managed Streams for Kafka, on AWS.
And MSK Was chosen for the ease of set up to reduce operational burden on our team,
and several built in features that we were interested in such as encryption, a robust set of default configurations,
and the automatic gathering of metrics.
So we wanted to facilitate access to the Event Bus for as many users within VA as possible, and after researching multiple options,
we found that the best way to do that is to place the cluster into a VA-routable subnet, and that would afford the greatest networking access.
We have completely turned off any sort of unauthenticated or unencrypted access to MSK and implemented role-based access control using AWS IAM.
And there we use the principle of least privilege and restrict access to specific topics to only specified consumers and producers
and the custom software we developed. So basically our producers and consumers that interact with the MSK cluster for our 2 pilot use cases,
they themselves are deployed as separate services into an EKS cluster in the LHDI environment.
And in this last phase we worked on hardening our original appointment use case
and developed a decision letter availability engine which will be demoed here soon.
Then we have identified Confluent as our schema registry of choice, and it has won out
against AWS Glue because of its maturity and a convenient REST API that it provides.
and then the next phase it will be setting up and integrating it with a integrating the self-hosted Confluent schema registry.
And then, finally, we have identified separate sets of significant metrics to monitor both the performance of MSK
as well as the stability of the consumers and producers that we have, and they will require different strategies to gather
and display on a custom Event Bus Datadog dashboard, and  we are planning on tackling that next in the next phase.
KAREN TAYLOR: Alright. Thank you.
So now the most exciting part, we're going to demo the current Event Bus capabilities.
And we'll hand over to Jamie White, who is a Java engineer on the team.
JAMIE WHITE: Yeah. So before getting into the actual demo, I wanted to give
a high-level overview of what we've built for the decision letter availability use case.
So we have a connection to BIP which Emily mentioned is the Benefits Integration Platform.
So this system has a set of events that we have identified.
It contains some records that represent that a decision letter is available for Veterans to look at.
So we've built this DLA engine, which is essentially a combination of a Kafka consumer that reads data from BIP
and a Kafka producer that sends the filtered data to our own Event Bus.
So we filter out anything that doesn't represent that a decision letter is available.
Once we have that subset of events,
we then have a consumer that we've developed which takes that event and sends a notification using the VANotify system
so we can deliver an email to a Veteran. And I'll demonstrate that
sending an email to my own inbox. So I'll go ahead and take over the screenshare.
So what I have here are a few screens in the bottom left, just a screen showing that the demo is running locally. So we've also deployed this
to a more production environment that's actually connected to BIP itself. But we also have this local environment that developers can use to run tests.
So this is just kind of containing a local Kafka instance.
So what I'll do first is I'll start up a Kafka producer.
So what I'll do here is be able to send messages kind of replicating what it would be like in the real system, with BIP sending events to us.
and then in the bottom right-hand corner, I have a consumer. So we'll be able to see the events as they come through.
So first, I'm gonna send a positive test case. So this is one that matches the filters that we have.
So we've identified it represents the decision letter's available.
And the fields here match what we'll see in the BIP events. So we have a number of properties that
make this look just like what we'd see in real data. So in the bottom right-hand corner,
we see that the consumer has received an event which means in the top left we should shortly see
a new email coming through.
So we have a kind of a template that we can use at VANotify which just kind of shows
Veterans that their claim has been submitted, and they can view the status.
I'll also show that we have the ability to filter out negative test cases. So if this doesn't match the properties we're looking for
we shouldn't see anything coming through
and just to show that it is still working, I'll send that positive test case again, and we can see it coming through in the bottom right-hand corner.
And there we have it.
KAREN TAYLOR: Okay, thank you, Jamie. Let me get switched back
to our presentation.
And we're going to hand off to Oseas Moran, who is the DevOps engineer on the team. Tell us about what you've been doing.
OSEAS MORAN: Sure. As part of phase 3 focus one of the requirements was
to harden our pipeline as we move towards production. A continuous integration workflow was created that does the following,
it checks for linting, unit test, integration testing, and incorporates the secure release pipeline when a pull request is created.
When that pull request is merged into the main branch, it will kick off a build and deploy workflow which builds
publishes the image to the Department of Veterans Affairs GitHub container registry and then deploys them into our infrastructure.
KAREN TAYLOR: Alright. So let's talk a little about what's next, and we'll bring Emily back.
EMILY WILSON: Yeah. So
I wanted to do a quick overview of what's next for the Event Bus. We're wrapping up right now what we called phase 3.
Phase 3 was a complete technical proof of concept. So, as you saw from the really awesome demo we have hooked up to real data sources.
These data sources are filtered and processed through the Event Bus system. And then we connect to other systems to do something, in this case
send an email with the event. We've also, as Oseas mentioned, have hardened the system so that we feel
good about its stability and its security.
The next step for us is to add more data sources onto the Enterprise Event Bus.
As you saw from the previous diagram, we have identified a bunch of different data sources across VA that could
be good candidates to enhance the data that we can potentially provide to consumers. A key part of this is going to be
creating and refining an onboarding onboarding journey so that developers have a smooth path to integrate with our system.
and part of this process will be deploying a schema registry and making it available for additional clients throughout the enterprise.
The next step will be to step and repeat. We want to guide two to three systems onto the Enterprise Event Bus.
We've identified data sources that we feel are high value because of the data they contain and as well as the potential that
they could, by incorporating them onto the Event Bus, we could relieve pressures on systems.
We could allow valuable use cases, such as notifications. So we want to guide between 2 to 3 systems onto the Enterprise Event Bus and
actually get them onto the Enterprise Event Bus, so that these data streams would be available for clients.
After that comes phase 4. And this is what we're calling the MVP feature complete. What we want to complete
is a minimum viable product and begin launching into the final preparations for full production release.
And that's what the
next goals of the Event Bus team are.
KAREN TAYLOR: Alright. Thank you. We'll wrap up with a quick look at some resources and documentation links.
So if you're interested in delving deeper about specifically what's been happening with the last 5 months on the Event Bus,
we have a phase 3 summary document. We also have a folder with lots of ADRs as we've been making decisions about how to architect the system.
There is a phase 3 artifacts folder. These are all on GitHub, by the way.
To give you some additional information about research that we've done during this phase, we have a folder of use cases.
This presentation that we've been looking at is available in PDF form. There will also be a recording of this,
and we'll add the link to this after the recording is actually available. Keep an eye in the Slack channel.
We'll be posting a link to both the slides and the recording there. If you are seeing this after the fact,
this is how you can get hold of it.
We also have a developer portal that's been put up. Please note it's draft status. The content is subject to change.
This is our first draft of information that we would have available for people who are interested in connecting to and working on the Event Bus.
If you enjoyed the demo that Jamie did, and would like to know more about that, we have links to the code,
the readme file, spec document about the decision letter availability use case,
as well as some information on the portal about subscribing to decision letter events.
And we also have some key research artifacts. We had a lot to go over today. So didn't very deep into this,
but there's been a lot of excellent user research and technical research done. And you can find the results,
those activities and all these documents that we have listed here. So we want to thank everyone who is here today with us in person
and anyone who may be watching this video later. Again please keep in mind it's very easy to contact us in Slack if you have any questions,
or would like to get on the bus. Thanks.